All this has important implications for rearing children. It suggests
that we should never heavily bribe or threaten our children to do the
things we want them truly to believe in. Such pressures will probably
produce temporary compliance with our wishes. However, if we want
more than just that, if we want the children to believe in the correctness
of what they have done, if we want them to continue to perform the
desired behavior when we are not present to apply those outside pres-
sures, then we must somehow arrange for them to accept inner respons-
ibility for the actions we want them to take. An experiment by Jonathan
Freedman gives us some hints about what to do and what not to do in
this regard.
Freedman wanted to see if he could prevent second- to fourth-grade
boys from playing with a fascinating toy, just because he had said that
it was wrong to do so some six weeks earlier. Anyone familiar with
seven-to-nine-year-old boys must realize the enormity of the task. But
Freedman had a plan. If he could first get the boys to convince them-
selves that it was wrong to play with the forbidden toy, perhaps that
belief would keep them from playing with it thereafter. The difficult
thing was making the boys believe that it was wrong to amuse them-
selves with the toy—an extremely expensive, battery-controlled robot.
Freedman knew it would be easy enough to have a boy obey tempo-
rarily. All he had to do was threaten the boy with severe consequences
should he be caught playing with the toy. As long as he was nearby to
deal out stiff punishment, Freedman figured that few boys would risk
operating the robot. He was right. After showing a boy an array of five
toys and warning him, “It is wrong to play with the robot. If you play
with the robot, I’ll be very angry and will have to do something about
it,” Freedman left the room for a few minutes. During that time, the
boy was observed secretly through a one-way mirror. Freedman tried
this threat procedure on twenty-two different boys, and twenty-one of
them never touched the robot while he was gone.
So a strong threat was successful while the boys thought they might
be caught and punished. But Freedman had already guessed that. He
was really interested in the effectiveness of the threat in guiding the
boys’ behavior later on, when he was no longer around. To find out
what would happen then, he sent a young woman back to the boys’
school about six weeks after he had been there. She took the boys out
of the class one at a time to participate in an experiment. Without ever
mentioning any connection with Freedman, she escorted each boy back
to the room with the five toys and gave him a drawing test. While she
was scoring the test, she told the boy that he was free to play with any
toy in the room. Of course, almost all the boys played with a toy. The
interesting result was that, of the boys playing with a toy, 77 percent
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 73
chose to play with the robot that had been forbidden to them earlier.
Freedman’s severe threat, which had been so successful six weeks before,
was almost totally unsuccessful when he was no longer able to back it
up with punishment.
But Freedman wasn’t finished yet. He changed his procedure slightly
with a second sample of boys. These boys, too, were initially shown the
array of five toys by Freedman and warned not to play with the robot
while he was briefly out of the room because “It is wrong to play with
the robot.” But this time, Freedman provided no strong threat to
frighten a boy into obedience. He simply left the room and observed
through the one-way mirror to see if his instruction against playing
with the forbidden toy was enough. It was. Just as with the other sample,
only one of the twenty-two boys touched the robot during the short
time Freedman was gone.
The real difference between the two samples of boys came six weeks
later, when they had a chance to play with the toys while Freedman
was no longer around. An astonishing thing happened with the boys
who had earlier been given no strong threat against playing with the
robot: When given the freedom to play with any toy they wished, most
avoided the robot, even though it was by far the most attractive of the
five toys available (the others were a cheap plastic submarine, a child’s
baseball glove without a ball, an unloaded toy rifle, and a toy tractor).
When these boys played with one of the five toys, only 33 percent chose
the robot.
Something dramatic had happened to both groups of boys. For the
first group, it was the severe threat they heard from Freedman to back
up his statement that playing with the robot was “wrong.” It had been
quite effective at first when Freedman could catch them should they
violate his rule. Later, though, when he was no longer present to observe
the boys’ behavior, his threat was impotent and his rule was, con-
sequently, ignored. It seems clear that the threat had not taught the
boys that operating the robot was wrong, only that it was unwise to do
so when the possibility of punishment existed.
For the other boys, the dramatic event had come from the inside, not
the outside. Freedman had instructed them, too, that playing with the
robot was wrong, but he had added no threat of punishment should
they disobey him. There were two important results. First, Freedman’s
instruction alone was enough to prevent the boys from operating the
robot while he was briefly out of the room. Second, the boys took per-
sonal responsibility for their choice to stay away from the robot during
that time. They decided that they hadn’t played with it because they
didn’t want to. After all, there were no strong punishments associated
with the toy to explain their behavior otherwise. Thus, weeks later,
74 / Influence
when Freedman was nowhere around, they still ignored the robot be-
cause they had been changed inside to believe that they did not want
17
to play with it.Adults facing the child-rearing experience can take a cue from the
Freedman study. Suppose a couple wants to impress upon their
daughter that lying is wrong. A strong, clear threat (“It’s bad to lie,
honey; so if I catch you at it, I’ll cut your tongue out”) might well be
effective when the parents are present or when the girl thinks she can
be discovered. But it will not achieve the larger goal of convincing her
that she does not want to lie because she thinks it’s wrong. To do that,
a much subtler approach is required. A reason must be given that is
just strong enough to get her to be truthful most of the time but is not
so strong that she sees it as the obvious reason for her truthfulness. It’s
a tricky business, because exactly what this barely sufficient reason will
be changes from child to child. For one little girl, a simple appeal may
be enough (“It’s bad to lie, honey; so I hope you won’t do it”); for an-
other child, it may be necessary to add a somewhat stronger reason
(“...because if you do, I’ll be disappointed in you”); for a third child, a
mild form of warning may be required as well (“...and I’ll probably
have to do something I don’t want to do”). Wise parents will know
which kind of reason will work on their own children. The important
thing is to use a reason that will initially produce the desired behavior
and will, at the same time, allow a child to take personal responsibility
for that behavior. Thus, the less detectable outside pressure such a
reason contains, the better. Selecting just the right reason is not an easy
task for parents. But the effort should pay off. It is likely to mean the
difference between short-lived compliance and long-term commitment.
For a pair of reasons we have already talked about, compliance pro-
fessionals love commitments that produce inner change. First, that
change is not just specific to the situation where it first occurred; it
covers a whole range of related situations, too. Second, the effects of
the change are lasting. So, once a man has been induced to take action
that shifts his self-image to that of, let’s say, a public-spirited citizen,
he is likely to be public-spirited in a variety of other circumstances
where his compliance may also be desired, and he is likely to continue
his public-spirited behavior for as long as his new self-image holds.
There is yet another attraction in commitments that lead to inner
change—they grow their own legs. There is no need for the compliance
professional to undertake a costly and continuing effort to reinforce the
change; the pressure for consistency will take care of all that. After our
friend comes to view himself as a public-spirited citizen, he will auto-
matically begin to see things differently. He will convince himself that
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 75
it is the correct way to be. He will begin to pay attention to facts he
hadn’t noticed before about the value of community service. He will
make himself available to hear arguments he hadn’t heard before favor-
ing civic action. And he will find such arguments more persuasive than
before. In general, because of the need to be consistent within his system
of beliefs, he will assure himself that his choice to take public-spirited
action was right. What is important about this process of generating
additional reasons to justify the commitment is that the reasons are new.
Thus, even if the original reason for the civic-minded behavior was
taken away, these newly discovered reasons might be enough by
themselves to support his perception that he had behaved correctly.
The advantage to an unscrupulous compliance professional is tre-
mendous. Because we build new struts to undergird choices we have
committed ourselves to, an exploitative individual can offer us an in-
ducement for making such a choice, and after the decision has been
made, can remove that inducement, knowing that our decision will
probably stand on its own newly created legs. New-car dealers fre-
quently try to benefit from this process through a trick they call
“throwing a lowball.” I first encountered the tactic while posing as a
sales trainee at a local Chevrolet dealership. After a week of basic in-
struction, I was allowed to watch the regular salesmen perform. One
practice that caught my attention right away was the lowball.
For certain customers, a very good price is offered on a car, perhaps
as much as four hundred dollars below competitors’ prices. The good
deal, however, is not genuine; the dealer never intends it to go through.
Its only purpose is to cause a prospect to decide to buy one of the deal-
ership’s cars. Once the decision is made, a number of activities develop
the customer’s sense of personal commitment to the car—a raft of pur-
chase forms are filled out, extensive financing terms are arranged,
sometimes the customer is encouraged to drive the car for a day before
signing the contract “so you can get the feel of it and show it around
in the neighborhood and at work.” During this time, the dealer knows,
customers automatically develop a range of new reasons to support the
choice they have now made.
Then something happens. Occasionally an “error” in the calculations
is discovered—maybe the salesman forgot to add in the cost of the air
conditioner, and if the buyer still requires air conditioning, four hundred
dollars must be added to the price. To keep from being suspected of
gouging by the customer, some dealers let the bank handling the finan-
cing find the mistake. At other times, the deal is disallowed at the last
moment when the salesman checks with his boss, who cancels it because
“We’d be losing money.” For only another four hundred dollars the
car can be had, which, in the context of a multithousand-dollar deal,
76 / Influence
doesn’t seem too steep since, as the salesman emphasizes, the cost is
equal to competitors’ and “This is the car you chose, right?” Another,
even more insidious form of lowballing occurs when the salesman
makes an inflated trade-in offer on the prospect’s old car as part of the
buy/trade package. The customer recognizes the offer as overly gener-
ous and jumps at the deal. Later, before the contract is signed, the used-
car manager says that the salesman’s estimate was four hundred dollars
too high and reduces the trade-in allowance to its actual, blue-book
level. The customer, realizing that the reduced offer is the fair one, ac-
cepts it as appropriate and sometimes feels guilty about trying to take
advantage of the salesman’s high estimate. I once witnessed a woman
provide an embarrassed apology to a salesman who had used the last
version of lowballing on her—this while she was signing a new-car
contract giving him a huge commission. He looked hurt but managed
a forgiving smile.
No matter which variety of lowballing is used, the sequence is the
same: An advantage is offered that induces a favorable purchase de-
cision; then, sometime after the decision has been made but before the
bargain is sealed, the original purchase advantage is deftly removed.
It seems almost incredible that a customer would buy a car under these
circumstances. Yet it works—not on everybody, of course, but it is ef-
fective enough to be a staple compliance procedure in many, many car
showrooms. Automobile dealers have come to understand the ability
of a personal commitment to build its own support system, a support
system of new justifications for the commitment. Often these justifica-
tions provide so many strong legs for the decision to stand on that when
the dealer pulls away only one leg, the original one, there is no collapse.
The loss can be shrugged off by the customer who is consoled, even
made happy, by the array of other good reasons favoring the choice. It
never occurs to the buyer that those additional reasons might never
18
have existed had the choice not been made in the first place.The impressive thing about the lowball tactic is its ability to make a
person feel pleased with a poor choice. Those who have only poor
choices to offer us, then, are especially fond of the technique. We can
find them throwing lowballs in business, social, and personal situations.
For instance, there’s my neighbor Tim, a true lowball aficionado. Recall
that he’s the one who, by promising to change his ways, got his girl-
friend, Sara, to cancel her impending marriage to another and to take
him back. Since her decision for Tim, Sara has become more devoted
to him than ever, even though he has not fulfilled his promises. She
explains this by saying that she has allowed herself to see all sorts of
positive qualities in Tim she had never recognized before.
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 77
I know full well that Sara is a lowball victim. Just as sure as I had
watched buyers fall for the give-it-and-take-it-away-later strategy in
the car showroom, I watched her fall for the same trick with Tim. For
his part, Tim remains the guy he has always been. But because the new
attractions Sara has discovered (or created) in him are quite real for her,
she now seems satisfied with the same arrangement that was unaccept-
able before her enormous commitment. The decision to choose Tim,
poor as it may have been objectively, has grown its own supports and
appears to have made Sara genuinely happy. I have never mentioned
to Sara what I know about lowballing. The reason for my silence is not
that I think her better off in the dark on the issue. As a general guiding
principle, more information is always better than less information. It’s
just that, if I said a word, I am confident she would hate me for it.
Depending on the motives of the person wishing to use them, any of
the compliance techniques discussed in this book can be employed for
good or for ill. It should not be surprising, then, that the lowball tactic
can be used for more socially beneficial purposes than selling new cars
or reestablishing relationships with former lovers. One research project
done in Iowa, for example, shows how the lowball procedure can influ-
19ence homeowners to conserve energy. The project, headed by Dr.
Michael Pallak, began at the start of the Iowa winter when residents
who heated their homes with natural gas were contacted by an inter-
viewer. The interviewer gave them some energy-conservation tips and
asked them to try to save fuel in the future. Although they all agreed
to try, when the researchers examined the utility records of these fam-
ilies after a month and again at winter’s end, it was clear that no real
savings had occurred. The residents who had promised to make a
conservation attempt used just as much natural gas as a random sample
of their neighbors who had not been contacted by an interviewer. Just
good intentions coupled with information about saving fuel, then, were
not enough to change habits.
Even before the project began, Pallak and his research team had re-
cognized that something more would be needed to shift long-standing
energy patterns. So they tried a slightly different procedure on a com-
parable sample of Iowa natural-gas users. These people, too, were
contacted by an interviewer, who provided energy-saving hints and
asked them to conserve. But for these families, the interviewer offered
something else: Those residents agreeing to save energy would have
their names publicized in newspaper articles as public-spirited, fuel-
conserving citizens. The effect was immediate. One month later, when
the utility companies checked their meters, the homeowners in this
sample had saved an average of 422 cubic feet of natural gas apiece.
78 / Influence
The chance to have their names in the paper had motivated these resid-
ents to substantial conservation efforts for a period of a month.
Then the rug was pulled out. The researchers extracted the reason
that had initially caused these people to save fuel. Each family that had
been promised publicity received a letter saying it would not be possible
to publicize their names after all.
At the end of the winter, the research team examined the effect that
letter had had on the natural-gas usage of the families. Did they return
to their old, wasteful habits when the chance to be in the newspaper
was removed? Hardly. For each of the remaining winter months, they
actually conserved more fuel than they had during the time they thought
they would be publicly celebrated for it! In terms of percentage of energy
savings, they had managed a 12.2 percent first-month gas savings be-
cause they expected to see themselves lauded in the paper. But after
the letter arrived informing them to the contrary, they did not return
to their previous energy-use levels; instead, they increased their savings
to a 15.5 percent level for the rest of the winter.
Although we can never be completely sure of such things, one explan-
ation for their persistent behavior presents itself immediately. These
people had been lowballed into a conservation commitment through a
promise of newspaper publicity. Once made, that commitment started
generating its own support: The homeowners began acquiring new
energy habits, began feeling good about their public-spirited efforts,
began convincing themselves of the vital need to reduce American de-
pendence on foreign fuel, began appreciating the monetary savings in
their utility bills, began feeling proud of their capacity for self-denial,
and, most important, began viewing themselves as conservation-
minded. With all these new reasons present to justify the commitment
to use less energy, it is no wonder that the commitment remained firm
even after the original reason, newspaper publicity, had been kicked
away.
But strangely enough, when the publicity factor was no longer a
possibility, these families did not merely maintain their fuel-saving ef-
fort, they heightened it. Any of a number of interpretations could be
offered for that still stronger effort, but I have a favorite. In a way, the
opportunity to receive newspaper publicity had prevented the
homeowners from fully owning their commitment to conservation. Of
all the reasons supporting the decision to try to save fuel, it was the
only one that had come from the outside; it was the only one preventing
the homeowners from thinking that they were conserving gas because
they believed in it. So when the letter arrived canceling the publicity
agreement, it removed the only impediment to these residents’ images
of themselves as fully concerned, energy-conscious citizens. This un-
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 79
qualified, new self-image then pushed them to even greater heights of
conservation. Whether or not such an explanation is correct, a repeat
study done by Pallak indicates that this hidden benefit of the lowball
tactic is no fluke.
The experiment was done in summer on Iowans whose homes were
cooled by central air-conditioning. Those homeowners who were
promised newspaper publicity decreased their electricity use by 27.8
percent during July, as compared to similar homeowners who were not
promised any coverage or who were not contacted at all. At the end of
July, a letter was sent canceling the publicity promise. Rather than re-
verting to their old habits, the lowballed residents increased their August
energy savings to a stunning 41.6 percent. Much like Sara, they appeared
to have become committed to a choice through an initial inducement
and were still more dedicated to it after the inducement had been re-
moved.

